The '''Appleton–Hartree equation''', sometimes also referred to as the '''Appleton–Lassen equation''' is a mathematical expression that describes the [[refractive index]] for [[electromagnetic wave]] propagation in a cold magnetized [[plasma (physics)|plasma]]. The Appleton–Hartree equation was developed independently by several different scientists, including [[Edward Victor Appleton]], [[Douglas Hartree]] and German radio physicist [[H. K. Lassen]].<ref name='lassen'>Lassen, H., ''I. Zeitschrift für Hochfrequenztechnik'', 1926.  Volume 28, pp. 109–113</ref>  Lassen's work, completed two years prior to Appleton and five years prior to Hartree, included a more thorough treatment of collisional plasma; but, published only in German, it has not been widely read in the English speaking world of radio physics.<ref name='suchy'>C. Altman, K. Suchy.  ''Reciprocity, Spatial Mapping and Time Reversal in Electromagnetics – Developments in Electromagnetic Theory and Application''.  Pp 13–15.  Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.  Also available online, [https://books.google.com/books?id=bQmQil-dMBUC Google Books Scan]</ref>  Further, regarding the derivation by Appleton, it was noted in the historical study by Gilmore that [[Wilhelm Altar]] (while working with Appleton) first calculated the dispersion relation in 1926.<ref name='gilmore'>C. Stewart Gilmore (1982), Proc. Am. Phil. S, Volume 126. pp. 395</ref>

==Equation==
The [[dispersion relation]] can be written as an expression for the frequency (squared), but it is also common to write it as an expression for the [[index of refraction]]:

:<math>n^2 = \left(\frac{ck}{\omega}\right)^2.</math>

===Full equation===
The equation is typically given as follows:<ref>{{Citation | last = Helliwell | first = Robert | date = 2006  | title = Whistlers and Related Ionospheric Phenomena | edition = 2nd | location = Mineola, NY | publisher = Dover | pages = 23–24}}</ref>

:<math>n^2 = 1 - \frac{X}{1 - iZ - \frac{\frac{1}{2}Y^2\sin^2\theta}{1 - X - iZ} \pm \frac{1}{1 - X - iZ}\left(\frac{1}{4}Y^4\sin^4\theta + Y^2\cos^2\theta\left(1 - X - iZ\right)^2\right)^{1/2}}</math>

or, alternatively, with damping term <math>Z = 0</math> and rearranging terms:<ref>{{Citation | last = Hutchinson | first = I.H. | date = 2005  | title = Principles of Plasma Diagnostics | edition = 2nd | location = New York, NY | publisher = [[Cambridge University Press]] | pages = 109}}</ref>

:<math>n^2 = 1 - \frac{X\left(1-X\right)}{1 - X - {\frac{1}{2}Y^2\sin^2\theta} \pm \left(\left(\frac{1}{2}Y^2\sin^2\theta\right)^2 + \left(1-X\right)^2Y^2\cos^2\theta\right)^{1/2}}</math>

===Definition of terms===

<math>n</math> = complex refractive index

<math>i</math> = <math>\sqrt{-1}</math>

<math>X = \frac{\omega_0^2}{\omega^2}</math>

<math>Y = \frac{\omega_H}{\omega}</math>

<math>Z = \frac{\nu}{\omega}</math>

<math>\nu</math> = electron collision frequency

<math>\omega = 2\pi f</math> (radial frequency)

<math>f</math> = wave frequency (cycles per second, or [[Hertz]])

<math>\omega_0 = 2\pi f_0 = \sqrt{\frac{Ne^2}{\epsilon_0 m}}</math> = electron [[plasma frequency]]

<math>\omega_H = 2\pi f_H = \frac{B_0 |e|}{m}</math> = electron [[gyro frequency]]

<math>\epsilon_0</math> = [[permittivity of free space]]

<math>B_0</math> = ambient [[magnetic field]] strength

<math>e</math> = [[electron charge]]

<math>m</math> = [[electron mass]]

<math>\theta</math> = angle between the ambient [[magnetic field]] vector and the [[wave vector]]

===Modes of propagation===

The presence of the <math>\pm</math> sign in the Appleton–Hartree equation gives two separate solutions for the refractive index.<ref>{{Citation | last = Bittencourt | first = J.A. | date = 2004  | title = Fundamentals of Plasma Physics | edition = 3rd | location = New York, NY | publisher = [[Springer-Verlag]] | pages = 419–429}}</ref> For propagation perpendicular to the magnetic field, i.e., <math>\mathbf k\perp \mathbf B_0</math>, the '+' sign represents the "ordinary mode," and the '−' sign represents the "extraordinary mode." For propagation parallel to the magnetic field, i.e., <math>\mathbf k\parallel \mathbf B_0</math>, the '+' sign represents a left-hand circularly polarized mode, and the '−' sign represents a right-hand circularly polarized mode. See the article on [[electromagnetic electron wave]]s for more detail.

<math>\mathbf k</math> is the vector of the propagation plane.

==Reduced forms==

===Propagation in a collisionless plasma===
If the electron collision frequency <math>\nu</math> is negligible compared to the wave frequency of interest <math>\omega</math>, the plasma can be said to be "collisionless." That is, given the condition

:<math>\nu \ll \omega</math>,

we have

:<math>Z = \frac{\nu}{\omega} \ll 1</math>,

so we can neglect the <math>Z</math> terms in the equation. The Appleton–Hartree equation for a cold, collisionless plasma is therefore,

:<math>n^2 = 1 - \frac{X}{1 - \frac{\frac{1}{2}Y^2\sin^2\theta}{1 - X} \pm \frac{1}{1 - X}\left(\frac{1}{4}Y^4\sin^4\theta + Y^2\cos^2\theta\left(1 - X\right)^2\right)^{1/2}}</math>

===Quasi-longitudinal propagation in a collisionless plasma===
If we further assume that the wave propagation is primarily in the direction of the magnetic field, i.e., <math>\theta \approx 0</math>, we can neglect the <math>Y^4\sin^4\theta</math> term above. Thus, for quasi-longitudinal propagation in a cold, collisionless plasma, the Appleton–Hartree equation becomes,

:<math>n^2 = 1 - \frac{X}{1 - \frac{\frac{1}{2}Y^2\sin^2\theta}{1 - X} \pm Y\cos\theta}</math>

==See also==
* [[Mary Taylor Slow]]
* [[Plasma (physics)]]
* [[Waves in plasmas]]
* [[List of plasma (physics) articles]]

==References==
{{refbegin}}
;Citations and notes
{{refend}}
{{reflist}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:Appleton-Hartree Equation}}
[[Category:Electromagnetic radiation]]
[[Category:Waves in plasmas]]
